23.0.0.4-beta staging (#3059)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2023-04-18-23.0.0.4-beta.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Jakarta Data preview update in Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/mbroz2
author_github: https://github.com/mbroz2
seo-title: Jakarta Data preview update in Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta - OpenLiberty.io

> seo-description: Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta provides an update to the Jakarta Data preview, introducing a way to combine multiple ways of specifying ordering and sorting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
seo-description: Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta updates the Jakarta Data preview with an option to combine multiple ways of specifying ordering and sorting.

```

> blog_description: Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta provides an update to the Jakarta Data preview, introducing a way to combine multiple ways of specifying ordering and sorting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
blog_description: Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta updates the Jakarta Data preview with an option to combine multiple ways of specifying ordering and sorting.

```

open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Jakarta Data preview update in Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta
Michal Broz <https://github.com/mbroz2>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /
//Blank line here is necessary before starting the body of the post.

> Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta provides an update to the Jakarta Data preview, introducing a way to combine multiple ways of specifying ordering and sorting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta updates the Jakarta Data preview with an option to combine multiple ways of specifying ordering and sorting.

```

The link:{url-about}[Open Liberty] 23.0.0.4-beta includes the following beta features (along with link:{url-prefix}/docs/latest/reference/feature/feature-overview.html[all GA features]):

* <<data, A Very Early Preview of Jakarta Data (Beta 2)>>

See also link:{url-prefix}/blog/?search=beta&key=tag[previous Open Liberty beta blog posts].

// // // // DO NOT MODIFY THIS COMMENT BLOCK <GHA-BLOG-TOPIC> // // // // 
// Blog issue: https://github.com/OpenLiberty/open-liberty/issues/25012
// Contact/Reviewer: ReeceNana,njr-11
// // // // // // // // 
[#data]
== A Very Early Preview of Jakarta Data (Beta 2)
   

> In Open Liberty 23.0.0.2-beta we introduced link:{url-prefix}/blog/2023/02/21/23.0.0.2-beta.html#data[A very early preview of Jakarta Data] which aims to standardize the popular Data Repository pattern across relational and NoSQL databases. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Open Liberty 23.0.0.2-beta, we introduced link:{url-prefix}/blog/2023/02/21/23.0.0.2-beta.html#data[a very early preview of Jakarta Data], which aims to standardize the popular Data Repository pattern across relational and NoSQL databases. 

```

> This Jakarta Data beta update allows you to combine multiple ways of specifying ordering and sorting, defining a precedence.  Sorting defined by `OrderBy` (annotation or query-by-method keyword) is applied first, followed by `Sort` parameters (on the method or `Pageable`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This Jakarta Data beta update allows you to combine multiple ways of specifying ordering and sorting, defining a precedence.  Sorting that is defined by the `OrderBy` annotation or query-by-method keyword is applied first, followed by `Sort` parameters on the method or `Pageable`.

```

> Building on from the code snippet provided in the original preview, the following is an example of using both `OrderBy` and `Sort`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building on from the code snippet provided in the link:{url-prefix}/blog/2023/02/21/23.0.0.2-beta.html#data[original preview], the following example uses both `OrderBy` and `Sort`:

```

[source,java]
----
public class Product { // entity
    public long id;
    public String name;
    public float price;
}

@Repository
public interface Products {
    Product findById(long productId);

    @OrderBy("price")
    List<Product> findByNameContains(String searchFor);

    @OrderBy("price")
    Page<Product> findByNameIgnoreCaseContains(String searchFor, Pageable pageRequest);

    @Query("UPDATE Product o SET o.price = o.price - (?2 * o.price) WHERE o.id = ?1")
    boolean discount(long productId, float discountRate);

    void save(Product p);
}

public class MyServlet extends HttpServlet {
    @Inject
    Products products;

    protected void doGet(HttpServletRequest req, HttpServletResponse resp)
            throws ServletException, IOException {
        // Find all matching:
        List<Product> all = products.findByNameContains(searchFor);

        // Request only the first page, ordered by price, then name, then id:
        Pageable pageRequest = Pageable.size(20).sortBy(Sort.asc("name"), Sort.asc("id"));
        Page<Product> page1 = products.findByNameIgnoreCaseContains(searchFor, pageRequest);
    }
}
----

> Jakarta Data has not yet defined a standard configuration model. For now, the Open Liberty beta reuses the existing `defaultDatabaseStore` configuration (which defaults to the `DefaultDataSource` data source) for Jakarta Data. This means the beta of Jakarta Data is currently limited to a single data source. This of course will change as the specification defines more of a configuration model. The `data-1.0` Liberty beta feature makes the Jakarta Data API available, and you also need a feature for Jakarta Persistence or JDBC (or at some point in the future, Jakarta NoSQL).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Jakarta Data has not yet defined a standard configuration model. For now, the Open Liberty beta reuses the existing `defaultDatabaseStore` configuration for Jakarta Data, which defaults to the `DefaultDataSource` data source. As a result, the beta of Jakarta Data is currently limited to a single data source. This of course will change as the specification defines more of a configuration model. The `data-1.0` Liberty beta feature makes the Jakarta Data API available, and you also need a feature for Jakarta Persistence or JDBC (or at some point in the future, Jakarta NoSQL).

```

Example server.xml configuration:

[source,xml]
----
<server>
  <featureManager>
    <feature>data-1.0</feature>
    <feature>persistence-3.1</feature> <!-- could use jdbc-4.3 instead -->
    <feature>servlet-6.0</feature> <!-- the example includes a servlet -->
  </featureManager>

  <dataSource id="DefaultDataSource">
    <jdbcDriver libraryRef="PostgreSQL"/>
    <properties.postgresql databaseName="testdb" serverName="localhost" portNumber="5432"/>
    <containerAuthData user="dbuser1" password="dbpwd1"/>
  </dataSource>

  <library id="PostgreSQL">
    <file name="${shared.resource.dir}/jdbc/postgresql.jar"/>
  </library>

  <!-- optional because the following are all defaulted: -->
  <databaseStore id="defaultDatabaseStore" createTables="true" dropTables="false"
          tablePrefix="WLP" dataSourceRef="DefaultDataSource"/>
</server>
----

> You can find th 1.0.0-b2 beta release of Jakarta Data on link:https://search.maven.org/artifact/jakarta.data/jakarta-data-api/1.0.0-b2/jar[Maven], which corresponds to the Open Liberty 23.0.0.4 beta.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find the 1.0.0-b2 beta release of Jakarta Data on link:https://search.maven.org/artifact/jakarta.data/jakarta-data-api/1.0.0-b2/jar[Maven], which corresponds to the Open Liberty 23.0.0.4 beta.

```

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>jakarta.data</groupId>
  <artifactId>jakarta-data-api</artifactId>
  <version>1.0.0-b2</version>
</dependency>
----

> For more information, refer to the the link:https://github.com/jakartaee/data/blob/main/spec/src/main/asciidoc/repository.asciidoc[draft of the Jakarta Data specification] and the link:https://search.maven.org/remotecontent?filepath=jakarta/data/jakarta-data-api/1.0.0-b2/jakarta-data-api-1.0.0-b2-javadoc.jar[corresponding Javadoc]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, refer to the the link:https://github.com/jakartaee/data/blob/main/spec/src/main/asciidoc/repository.asciidoc[draft of the Jakarta Data specification] and the link:https://search.maven.org/remotecontent?filepath=jakarta/data/jakarta-data-api/1.0.0-b2/jakarta-data-api-1.0.0-b2-javadoc.jar[corresponding Javadoc].

```

---
layout: post
title: "Jakarta Data preview update in Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/mbroz2
author_github: https://github.com/mbroz2
seo-title: Jakarta Data preview update in Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Open Liberty 23.0.0.4-beta updates the Jakarta Data preview with an option to combine multiple ways of specifying ordering and sorting.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
